# ADR 001: Pipeline architecture

## Context

WebAssembly is designed to be decoded, validated and compiled in a single pass.
This equally applies to JIT and AOT compilers.

Furthermore, the WebAssembly bytecode format defines an element section and a data section for the initial data of the table and memory of a module.
In addition, imports and exports are defined by every module to allow the usage of external resources and to provide resources to the embedding environment or other modules.

Typically compilers are implemented as a pipeline architecture that has several steps and transforms the input source code into one or several intermediate representations.
It starts off in a parser that generates some form of intermediate representation.
This intermediate representation is then either executed in an interpreter or, after some potential optimizations, directly compiled to machine code.
There might be some intermediate step for linking if the source format supports several modules.

The Truffle framework uses abstract syntax trees as its intermediate representation.
Guest languages like GraalWasm are required to transform their source code into an AST for Truffle to be able to partially evaluate and compile the resulting interpreter.
Any other form or running code is currently not supported.

## Decision

We will implement a three step pipeline architecture for GraalWasm.
In the first step, the bytecode is parsed and validated.
The output of this parsing step is an AST containing the control structures of the bytecode and actions that need to be performed during linking.
In the second step, the linker executes all actions provided by the parsing step, resolves imports and exports and initializes the table and memory of every module.
In the third step, the AST is executed in an interpreter that gets automatically optimized by the Truffle framework.

## Status

Active

## Consequences

Having several steps allows for optimizations before the execution of the code in the interpreter.
Furthermore, this makes the compliance to the Truffle frameworks AST representation easier.
In addition, this architecture is easier to comprehend than having everything in a single step.
This architecture is also easier to test, since the individual steps can be tested independent of each other.

This approach will increase warmup time since additional work has to be performed before executing the code.
In addition, extending the code with new features might imply changes in several locations.

## Commit

`179a300ef29`

## Artifacts

- [org.graalvm.wasm.nodes.WasmBlockNode](../../src/org.graalvm.wasm/src/org/graalvm/wasm/nodes/WasmBlockNode.java)
- [org.graalvm.wasm.nodes.WasmCallStubNode](../../src/org.graalvm.wasm/src/org/graalvm/wasm/nodes/WasmCallStubNode.java)
- [org.graalvm.wasm.nodes.WasmEmptyNode](../../src/org.graalvm.wasm/src/org/graalvm/wasm/nodes/WasmEmptyNode.java)
- [org.graalvm.wasm.nodes.WasmIfNodes](../../src/org.graalvm.wasm/src/org/graalvm/wasm/nodes/WasmIfNode.java)
- [org.graalvm.wasm.nodes.WasmIndirectCallNode](../../src/org.graalvm.wasm/src/org/graalvm/wasm/nodes/WasmIndirectCallNode.java)
- [org.graalvm.wasm.nodes.WasmNode](../../src/org.graalvm.wasm/src/org/graalvm/wasm/nodes/WasmNode.java)
- [org.graalvm.wasm.nodes.WasmNodeInterface](../../src/org.graalvm.wasm/src/org/graalvm/wasm/nodes/WasmNodeInterface.java)
- [org.graalvm.wasm.nodes.WasmRootNode](../../src/org.graalvm.wasm/src/org/graalvm/wasm/nodes/WasmRootNode.java)
- [org.graalvm.wasm.nodes.WasmUndefinedFunctionRootNode](../../src/org.graalvm.wasm/src/org/graalvm/wasm/nodes/WasmUndefinedFunctionRootNode.java)
- [org.graalvm.wasm.BinaryParser](../../src/org.graalvm.wasm/src/org/graalvm/wasm/BinaryParser.java)
- [org.graalvm.wasm.BinaryStreamParser](../../src/org.graalvm.wasm/src/org/graalvm/wasm/BinaryStreamParser.java)
- [org.graalvm.wasm.Linker](../../src/org.graalvm.wasm/src/org/graalvm/wasm/Linker.java)
- [org.graalvm.wasm.SymbolTable](../../src/org.graalvm.wasm/src/org/graalvm/wasm/SymbolTable.java)

## Relations

- enables [ADR 003](./adr-003.md)
- enables [ADR 005](./adr-005.md)
- enables [ADR 008](./adr-008.md)